---
layout: page
published: true
title: About
nav: about
sitemap:
    priority: 0.8
---

<div class="post-img-left top-p">
    <img class="post-img-150" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pages/about/NicholasArmstrong.jpg" title="Nicholas Armstrong" alt="Nicholas Armstrong"/>
</div>

I'm **Nicholas Armstrong**, an engineering manager and developer living and working in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. I
moved to Waterloo in 2004 to pursue an undergraduate degree in Computer Engineering at the University of Waterloo, and
followed that up with a Master's of Applied Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering, also at the University of
Waterloo. My thesis proposed a technique for speeding up web browsing over mobile networks through a proxy server that
scans server responses and pushes content to the user just-in-time.

Since 2009, I have held leadership roles at  <a title="Carnegie Technologies" href="http://www.pravala.com">Carnegie
Technologies</a> and <a title="Pravala Networks" href="http://www.pravala.com">Pravala Networks</a>, where I supervise
and mentor developers, organize development activities, write code, architect applications, write patents and technical
sales material, and work directly with our customers around the globe.  Pravala Networks joined the Carnegie
Technologies family in 2016, where I am now Head of Software Development, North America.  Carnegie’s Network Convergence
Platform™ offers truly ubiquitous, always-on connectivity between Wi-Fi and cellular networks, for voice and video with
no gaps and no dropped sessions.

Undergraduate Computer Engineering at Waterloo is a Co-operative Education degree program, which meant that, starting at
the end of my first undergraduate year, I switched every four months between school and working for a company in my
field. My first co-op position was at Hydro One Networks in Barrie, Ontario; the second, which I completed in April
2006, was at the Greater Toronto Airports Authority in Mississauga. I spent two terms with Systemgroup, Inc. between
September 2006 and September 2008 as a software consultant, working out of their Mississauga office as well as various
client sites around the Greater Toronto Area. I spent my last two work terms (between January 2008 and December 2008) on
the Windows Presentation Foundation team at Microsoft, once as a Software Design Engineer (SDE) Intern and once as a
Program Manager Intern. During those terms at Microsoft, I designed and developed <a
href="http://channel9.msdn.com/shows/Continuum/PhotoSuru/">photoSuru</a>, a WPF photo viewing sample
application presented in the <a href="http://channel9.msdn.com/pdc2008/KYN02/">PDC 2008 Keynote</a>.

My development interests include user experience, interface design, and high performance web applications and web
services. My recent work has focused on delivering high-performance web services to drive mobile client and web
applications at scale, and single-page web applications built on top of those services. Over the course of my career I
have worked extensively with Node.js, Android, WPF, SQL, and .NET, with experience in numerous other languages,
platforms, tools, and environments.

#### Contacting Nicholas
You can contact Nicholas by emailing 'contact' at this domain (nicholasarmstrong.com).
